Royal Genealogy of Sikkim

by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

The intermediate Indrabhuti, known as King Dza of Zahor in the East, had three sons: Śākyaputri,
Nāgaputri and Guhyeputri. Three generations later, a descendent of the eldest, Śākyaputri,
called Dharmapāla, travelled from Bengal to China. He stayed in the meditative centre
of Bhatahor[1] in the Nakdru region.

A descendant of Dharmapāla travelled from Minyak to Samye at the time of the Abbot, Teacher
and Dharma-King.[2] His property-guarding spirit known as Gyalpo Shingchachen[3] was appointed
as the property guardian of Samye, and his descendants settled in Chongye. This royal
lineage looked after the kingdom in Minyak for twenty-five (some sources say five) generations.


During Jamyang Sakya Paṇḍita’s time the family became his patrons. Sakya Paṇḍita performed the
rite of Guru Drakpo[4] and took a scorpion seal as a treasure which he is said to have
given to the king.[5] Then Guru Drakpo issued a prophecy to the king, saying that he should
go to Sikkim. The king and prince went, accompanied by eighteen of their subjects, and visited
the Jowo Śākyamuni in Lhasa. The Jowo spoke to them, and they went on to Sakya.

In the great temple at Sakya, the eldest prince helped to erect the gigantic pillars. Chögyal
Pakpa said he had the strength of a hundred thousand men and nicknamed him Bumsak (‘a hundred
thousand put together’). He married Jetsün Guruma[6] of Sakya. Together they went down
and founded Pakshi Monastery[7] north of Gampa Dzong, where there were about four hundred
monks. One brother took ordination and was appointed the resident lama. He [i.e., Bumsak]
stayed at Pakri where he founded Samdrup Temple and so on. There the father died. Three
brothers—Seshing,[8] Tsentong and Katsok—went southwards to the place called Ha. Gye [Bumsak]
travelled through Dromo Kharchung and Chumoshong to Chumbi, where he built a house.

Ngawang Gyepa Palbar of Bhutan challenged Gyebum [i.e., Gye Bumsak] to a contest. Gyebum took
three measures of mustard seeds and pressed them in his hands to produce oil. Gye Palbar
asked for the same quantity of mustard seeds, then pressed them, but did not extract any
oil. Gyebum then threw a giant stone to the far side of the Dromo river. Gye Palbar managed
to throw it only a distance of seven steps. The Bhutanese Gye (Druk-gye) held Gyebum’s right
hand to throw him but lost his grip and landed on his back. Then Gyebum gripped Druk-gye’s
right hand and dislocated his arm at the shoulder blade, falling back six or seven paces.
Druk-gye’s arm was plainly in Gyebum’s hand and, howling in pain, he returned to his
own country. There he invoked the power of Masang,[9] but Gyebum had power over gods, demons
and human beings. Masang manifested as a blue person, blue horse and blue dog and went
before Gyebum. Humbled, he said, “Make offerings to me.” [Gyebum] replied, “I have nothing
to offer.” The spirit said, “Put some barley and water in a large vessel and offer that.”
He sacrificed an old white-heeled yak and presented it as an offering. This marks the beginning
of Masang worship [in Sikkim].[10]

In Chumbi Gyebum had no sons. But among the Mön were the Guru’s emanations Tekong Tek[11] and
Nyokong.[12] Three sons were born to Tekong. The youngest son took over the kingdom; he
took a daughter from the Sakya family as his wife. Their sons were Zhangpo Dar[13] and Tse
Chudar.[14] Then came Nyima Gyalpo and Guru Tashi, and Guru Tashi’s son Jowo Nakpo. His son
was Apak,[15] whose son was Guru Tendzin.

His son was Chögyal Puntsok Namgyal, who took as his gurus Lhatsün Namkha Jigme, Ngadak Rigdzin
Puntsok,[16] Katokpa Kuntu Zangpo and the Great Fifth Dalai Lama. The Great Fifth presented
him with the crown of King Ja and other gifts. His son was Tensung Namgyal, whose wife,
Pema Butri, was the daughter of the Zamsarpa family from the region of Tingkye in the
northwest of Sikkim. Their son was Chakdor Namgyal (b.1686), who took the Third Lhatsün Jigme
Pawo (b. 1682) and others as his teachers. His queen was the daughter of the King of Mustang
and their son was Chögyal Gyurme Namgyal (1707–1733). It was at this time that Mingyur
Paldrön of Mindrolling fled to Sikkim and the king became her patron. He took her sister
Mingyur Drolma as his wife, but she returned to Mindrolling without issue.

[Puntsok Namgyal II] took Mikbabkyi, the daughter of Zamsar Kyide Pukpa, as his wife and their
son was Tendzin Namgyal (1769–1793), who married the daughter of Dzöpa Garwang. Their son
was Chögyal Tsukpü Namgyal (1785–1863). It was during his lifetime that Druptop Karpo and
Karma Sherab appeared. To queen Mönkyi was born Chögyal Tutop Namgyal (1860–1914). After
him came the one victorious in the three realms of existence (including the god realm) Sisum
Namgyal, Sidkeong (1819–1874), also known as Karma Drubgyü Tendzin Dargye Lhundrup Ngedön
Wangpo, who was ordained by the fourteenth Karmapa.

To the eighth Chögyal Tutop Namgyal and his wife Palding[17] of Tashilhunpo was born Tsodrak
Namgyal. He was exiled to Traring and his brother Sidkeong Namgyal (1879–1914) took the throne
in Sikkim.

Tashi Namgyal (1893–1963), who was born to the daughter of Princess Lhadingpa, Yeshe Drönma,[18]
is still alive, as is Princess Chönyi Wangmo (1896–1953) who lives in Kalimpong. Tashi
Namgyal's queen, daughter of the Rakar Shak[19] general, was Kunzang Dechen (1906–1987).
They had three sons and three daughters, of whom the eldest [Kunzang Paljor Namgyal, 1921–1941]
was killed in a plane crash.[20] The middle son is Palden Döndrup Namgyal (1923–1982)
and the youngest Jigdral Tsewang Namgyal (b. 1928). The eldest daughter Koko (or Kuku-la,
alias Pema Choki, 1924–2008) married into the Punkhang family. The middle one, Kulai, married
into the Yutok family and the youngest[21] is still here now. There is also another
daughter, Trinley Wangmo, from a different father.

This was extracted from Chökyi Lodrö’s notebook where it was written in his own hand.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2020.